Allergies are diseases of the immune system that cause an overreaction to
substances called "allergens." Allergies are grouped by the kind of trigger,
time of year or where symptoms appear on the body: indoor andoutdoor allergies
(also called "hay fever," "seasonal," "perennial" or "nasal" allergies), food
and drug allergies, latex allergies, insect allergies, skin allergies and eye
allergies. People who have allergies can live healthy and active lives.

movieMultimedia Allergy Library
GlossaryGlossary of Allergy Terms

What are Allergies  |   What Causes Allergies  |   Diagnosis  |   Treatment  |
Prevention  |  

What Causes Allergies

The substances that cause allergic disease in people are known as allergens.
"Antigens," or protein particles like pollen, food or dander enter our bodies
through a variety of ways. If the antigen causes an allergic reaction, that
particle is considered an "allergen" – and antigen that triggers an allergic
reaction. These allergens can get into our body in several ways:

    * Inhaled into the nose and the lungs. Examples are airborne pollens of
    * certain trees, grasses and weeds; house dust that include dust mite
    * particles, mold spores, cat and dog dander and latex dust.
        * Ingested by mouth. Frequent culprits include shrimp, peanuts and
        * other nuts.
            * Injected. Such as medications delivered by needle like
            * penicillin or other injectable drugs, and venom from insect
            * stings and bites.
                * Absorbed through the skin. Plants such as poison ivy, sumac
                * and oak and latex are examples.

                What Makes Some Pollen Cause Allergies, and Not Others?

                Plant pollens that are carried by the wind cause most
                allergies of the nose, eyes and lungs. These plants (including
                certain weeds, trees and grasses) are natural pollutants
                produced at various times of the year when their small,
                inconspicuous flowers discharge literally billions of pollen
                particles.

                Because the particles can be carried significant distances, it
                is important for you not only to understand local
                environmental conditions, but also conditions over the broader
                area of the state or region in which you live. Unlike the
                wind-pollinated plants, conspicuous wild flowers or flowers
                used in most residential gardens are pollinated by bees,
                wasps, and other insects and therefore are not widely capable
                of producing allergic disease.

                What is the Role of Heredity in Allergy?

                Like baldness, height and eye color, the capacity to become
                allergic is an inherited characteristic. Yet, although you may
                be born with the genetic capability to become allergic, you
                are not automatically allergic to specific allergens. Several
                factors must be present for allergic sensitivity to be
                developed:

                    * The specific genes acquired from parents.
                        * The exposure to one or more allergens to which you
                        * have a genetically programmed response.
                            * The degree and length of exposure.

                            A baby born with the tendency to become allergic
                            to cow's milk, for example, may show allergic
                            symptoms several months after birth. A genetic
                            capability to become allergic to cat dander may
                            take three to four years of cat exposure before
                            the person shows symptoms. These people may also
                            become allergic to other environmental substances
                            with age.

                            On the other hand, poison ivy allergy (contact
                            dermatitis) is an example of an allergy in which
                            hereditary background does not play a part. The
                            person with poison ivy allergy first has to be
                            exposed to the oil from the plant. This usually
                            occurs during youth, when a rash does not always
                            appear. However, the first exposure may sensitize
                            or cause the person to become allergic and, when
                            subsequent exposure takes place, a contact
                            dermatitis rash appears and can be quite severe.
                            Many plants are capable of producing this type of
                            rash. Substances other than plants, such as dyes,
                            metals, and chemicals in deodorants and cosmetics,
                            can also cause a similar dermatitis.
